Add devblog article for `DataUpdateCoordinator` `_async_setup` (#2255)
home-assistant/developers.home-assistant: blog/2024-07-19-coordinator_async_setup.md

---
author: Josef Zweck
authorURL: https://github.com/zweckj
title: Set up your `DataUpdateCoordinator` with a setup method
---

In Home Assistant 2024.8, we are introducing the `_async_setup` method for the data update coordinator. 
This method allows you to run asynchronous code to prepare your `DataUpdateCoordinator` instance
or to load data that only needs to be loaded once.

You can override `_async_setup` in your coordinator, and it will be automatically
called during `coordinator.async_config_entry_first_refresh()`.
It offers the same error handling as `_async_update_data` and will handle `ConfigEntryError`
and `ConfigEntryAuthFailed` accordingly.

> ## Example

Reviewer: Instead of including these examples in the blog, update the dev docs for the coordinator and link to that page from the blog.

We shouldn't use the blog as documentation. It's just a way to announce the changes.

Author: I think a simple example is always included in the examples, I removed the second one. There is a PR already the docs already #2254, but I think it needs a bigger revamp, so let's do this in a follow up

Reviewer: We should link to the docs page from this blog. In my opinion putting an example here is just duplicate work that may get outdated. We want to direct people to read the docs.

Author: I added a link to the documentation. 
I disagree. Because as dev on the blog, I want to read only the relevant updates with a snippet and not read the whole documentation. Even if the blog become outdated, that's no problem, since that's expected from a blog.
Imho we need a major revamp of the whole coordinator documentation, but I don't think that's in scope for this change.

Author: stripped down the example to a more lean one, so it's less documentation and more of a practical example.

```python
# Example of a custom DataUpdateCoordinator with the `_async_setup` method
# This example demonstrates how to initialize data that only needs to be loaded once
# by overwriting _async_setup

from homeassistant.helpers.update_coordinator import DataUpdateCoordinator

class MyUpdateCoordinator(DataUpdateCoordinator[MyDataType]):
    """Class to handle fetching data from the API centrally."""

    prereq_data: SomeData

    def __init__(
        self,
        hass: HomeAssistant,
    ) -> None:
        """Initialize coordinator."""
        super().__init__(hass, _LOGGER, name=DOMAIN, update_interval=SCAN_INTERVAL)
        self.my_api = MyApi()

    async def _async_setup(self) -> None:
        """Do initialization logic."""
        self.prereq_data = await self.my_api.get_initial_data()

    async def _async_update_data(self) -> MyDataType:
        """Do the usual update"""
        return await self.my_api.update(self.prereq_data)
```

> and call it during platform setup

Reviewer: This statement doesn't have a beginning or end to make a sentence.

---
author: Josef Zweck
authorURL: https://github.com/zweckj

> title: Setting up `DataUpdateCoordinators` with `_async_setup`

Reviewer 2: Now it could like `DataUpdateCoorindators` is a thing, but it's only without the `s`. Maybe we can call it. New lifecycle hook for coordinators or something like that

Reviewer 3: `DataUpdateCoordinator` now supports a setup method. Or something as such perhaps.

Reviewer 3: Unresolving as the title isn't correct still

Author: I did remove the `s` so I resolved it, updated title again

---

Until now, there was no clearly defined place where you would initialize your `DataUpdateCoordinator`,

> or where you could load data, that only needs to be loaded once.

Reviewer 2: the constructor initializes the data update coordinator. what we now added is a way to prepare before the coordinator starts

In Home Assistant 2024.8 we are introducing an `_async_setup` method for coordinators that changes that. 
`_async_setup` can be overwritten in your coordinator, and will be automatically
called during `coordinator.async_config_entry_first_refresh()`.
It offers the same error handling as `_async_update_data` and will handle `ConfigEntryError`
and `ConfigEntryAuthFailed` accordingly

## Example

```python
from homeassistant.helpers.update_coordinator import DataUpdateCoordinator

class MyUpdateCoordinator(DataUpdateCoordinator[MyDataType]):
    """Class to handle fetching data from the API centrally."""

    def __init__(
        self,
        hass: HomeAssistant,
    ) -> None:
        """Initialize coordinator."""
        super().__init__(hass, _LOGGER, name=DOMAIN, update_interval=SCAN_INTERVAL)
        self.prereq_data: SomeData | None = None
        self.my_api = MyApi()

    async def _async_setup(self) -> None:
        """Do initialization logic."""
        self.prereq_data = await self.my_api.get_initial_data()

    async def _async_update(self) -> MyDataType:
        """Do the usual update"""
        return await self.my_api.update(self.prereq_data)

```

> 

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's also good to leave a snippet like
```py
async def _async_update_data(self) -> ...:
    if not self.something:
        self.something = self.client.fetch()
    return self.client.fetch_data()
```
As that is the thing we wanted to avoid with this feature, and now that can be changed to
```py
async def _async_setup(self) -> None:
    self.something = self.client.fetch()

async def _async_update_data(self) -> ...:
    return self.client.fetch_data()
```

Author: added those snippets, because I like them

or to load data that only needs to be loaded once.

You can override `_async_setup` in your coordinator, and it will be automatically
called during `coordinator.async_config_entry_first_refresh()`.
It offers the same error handling as `_async_update_data` and will handle `ConfigEntryError`
and `ConfigEntryAuthFailed` accordingly.

## Example

```python
# Example of a custom DataUpdateCoordinator with the `_async_setup` method
# This example demonstrates how to initialize data that only needs to be loaded once.

from homeassistant.helpers.update_coordinator import DataUpdateCoordinator

class MyUpdateCoordinator(DataUpdateCoordinator[MyDataType]):
    """Class to handle fetching data from the API centrally."""

    def __init__(
        self,
        hass: HomeAssistant,
    ) -> None:
        """Initialize coordinator."""
        super().__init__(hass, _LOGGER, name=DOMAIN, update_interval=SCAN_INTERVAL)
        self.prereq_data: SomeData | None = None
        self.my_api = MyApi()

    async def _async_setup(self) -> None:
        """Do initialization logic."""
        self.prereq_data = await self.my_api.get_initial_data()

>     async def _async_update(self) -> MyDataType:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    async def _async_update_data(self) -> MyDataType:
```

        """Do the usual update"""

>         return await self.my_api.update(self.prereq_data)

Reviewer: Note that `self.prereq_data` is still optional here so we may still need a condition check or hint the type checker that `self.prereq_data` isn't `None` anymore.

Author: moved it to class attribute, now mypy would be happy

---
author: Josef Zweck
authorURL: https://github.com/zweckj

> title: Set up your `DataUpdateCoordinator` with `_async_setup`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: Set up your `DataUpdateCoordinator` with a setup method
```

---

In Home Assistant 2024.8, we are introducing the `_async_setup` method for the data update coordinator. 
This method allows you to run asynchronous code to prepare your `DataUpdateCoordinator` instance
or to load data that only needs to be loaded once.

> You can override `_async_setup` in your coordinator, and it will be automatically

Reviewer 3: Should we add something that besides overwriting this method the dev can also instead define their own setup method (and also in the example below clarify that it's for overwriting the method).

Author: Mmh not sure about the setup_method. I expect it will hardly be used. Like, I never see the update method being used. Imo that's more interesting for a proper docs update of the coordinator page, not the blog. 
I don't know, what would you put there? I would've thought it's clear enough.

Author: now got what you meant. Since I found some `update_method` params after all, decided to add it and changed the comment.
